


Customs Act (IV of 1969)
Section 25A

1. The whole function of the PSI Agency as
described in 25A of the Act and in the contract
documents reveals in ascertainment of the cor-
rectness of the statement made by the importer in
respect of the goods to be imported, particularly
as to quality, quantity, price, description, HS
Code classification or, in other words, classifica-
tion of any goods as well as valuation. The
Customs Authority rightly charged VAT on the
services of the PSI Agency as the Surveyors par
ticularly on the background of the explanation 4
the Surveyors.

            
            Pre Shipment Inspection (PSI)
the PSI agents are appointed by the
Government to do certain works in connection
with importable goods i.e. inspection of the
good, which is imported into Bangladesh, and
they render service in lieu of fees and commis-
sion.

surveyor’ and ‘Consultants’

The service render by the petitioners in con-
nection with new contract is absolutely in the
nature of ‘Surveyor' and not that of 'Consul-
tants’.

Surveyor and Consultant

There are positive laws and rules concerning
PSI Agency in minute details and those Laws and
Rules portrait service rendered by PSI Agency as
"Surveyor". But nowhere in those Laws and
Rules it could be found that there has been any
deliberation given in any manner highlighting
the PSI Agency as "Consultant". In other words
we can say that no elaboration under the scheme
of Laws and Rules in that respect are there to
made us think that PSI Agency are Consultants.

NBR Chairman vs Intertex Testing Services
International Ltd. 11 BLC (AD) 233 and Sadharan Bima
Corporation vs Bengal Liner 48 DLR (AD) 143 ref.

Fida M Kamal with Akhter Imam, Senior Advocates,
Abdullah M Hasan, Advocate — For the Petitioners (In
all the writ Petitioners).

Mahmudul Islam with Nahid Mahtab, Advocates—
For respondent No, I (In all writ petitions).

SM Moniruzzman, Assistant Attorney-General — For
respondents. (In all the Writ Petitions).
<br>

Judgment
<br>
Md Ashfaqul Islam J : All these Writ petitions
are taken up together and disposed of by a single
judgment since all the writ petitions deal with a
common question of law and fact.

2. BIVAC Intemational SA and another, Inter-
tek International limited and another, SGS Societe
Generale de Surveillance SA and another, Overseas
Merchandises Inspection Co Limited and another
are the petitioners respectively in writ petition
Nos.5337, 5354, 5355 and 5924 of 2009.

3. The petitioners in all the petitions are
aggrieved by the arbitrary action of the respondents,
as elaborated hereunder, being without lawful
authority and in violation of public procurement Act,
2006 (hereinafter as referred to as Act) and public
procurement Rules (hereinafter as referred to as
Rules) deducting VAT from the petitioners at the rate
of 13.04% erroneously treating them as "Surveyors"
and not as "Consultants" who are subject to pay VAT
at the rate of 4.5% as it would appear from Annexure
-A series and in all these writ petitions, the Rule was
issued in the following manner :
<br>
"Let a Rule Nisi issue calling upon the
<br>
_ respondents to show cause as to why (a) the let-
ters variously issued by the respondents deduct-
ing VAT from the petitioners' invoices purport-
edly at a rate higher than 4.5% (as evidenced in
Annexure-A series and more specifically identi-
fied in Prayer 'A' to the writ petition) (a) failure
of the Respondents to treat the petitioners
"Consultants" for the purpose of payment of
VAT under the VAT Act 1991 and the VAT
Rules 1991 (c) deduction of VAT from the peti-
tioners' invoices. at a rate higher than 4.5%
thereby, not treating the Petitioners as "Consult-
ants" in palpable violation of the Public
Procurement Act, 2006 and. the Public
Procurement Rules, 2008 and (d) the failure of
the Respondents to refund/adjust the excess
VAT deducted from the petitioners’ invoices
should not be declared to be without any lawful
authority and are of no legal effect and to

            
            declare such action as unconstitutional and
being violative of the petitioners’ fundamental
rights guaranteed under Articles 27 and 31 of
the Constitution."

4. At the time of issuance of the Rule this
Division directed the respondents to treat the peti-
tioners "Consultants' and impose and deduct VAT at
the rate applicable to "Consultants' from time to
time at the rate of 4.5% and to accept bank guaran-
tees at the time of payment of invoices covering the
differential amount of 8.54%.

5. The back ground of issuance of the Rule, in
short, is that the National Board of Revenue (NBR)
respondent No.1 by a letter issued by Member,
National Board of Revenue, respondent No.2 direct-
ed the Commissioners of different Customs Houses
to deduct VAT at the rate of 15% from the PSI com-
panies in accordance with the formula set out by the
NBR in terms of the said letter. In the light of the
said letter respondents have been deducting VAT
from the petitioners' invoice at the rate of 15%
which is in excess of statutory maximum and in vio-
lation of section 3 of the VAT Act 1991.

6. The government of Bangladesh, on 21-5-
2008 published an advertisement in the Daily Star,
inviting "request for Expression of Interest for
Appointment of Pre-Shipment Inspection (PSI)
Agencies." Paragraph 5 of the said advertisement
reads as follows.
<br>
"PSI Agencies will be selected in accor-
dance with the procedure set out in "The Public
Procurement Act 2006" and the "The Public
Procurement Rules, 2008 . (emphasis added)

7. The tasks to be performed by the PSI
Agents were set out in the following manner;
<br>
"(a) To verify description quantity and quali-
ty of goods as per invoices and packing
lists supplied by the exporter.
<br>
(b) To determine the correct HS Code of the
goods in accordance with the existing
law and rules;
<br>
(c) To determine and certify correct value in
accordance with the existing laws and
rules:
<br>
(d) To ensure compliance with the shipment
procedures and container sealing as per
rules and order;
<br>
(e) To issue CRFS and NNRF after under-
taking proper inspection (physical aaand
otherwise) prior to shipment of the con-
signments to be exported as per rules,
<br>
(f)To help prepare and sustain a valuation
database.
<br>
In response to the said advertisement the petitioner
submitted its Expression of Interest for Appointment
of PSI Agency to the Member (Customs) National
Board of Revenue. Thereafter the petitioners were
informed by the Government of Bangladesh by its
letter dated 19-6-2008 that it has been short-listed for
sending request for Proposal (RFP) (Annexure-C),

8. It has been stated that the said request for
proposal clearly intended the petitioners to provide .
consultancy services. Section 1.1 and Section 1.2 of
the RFP provide as follows :
<br>
"1.1 The Client (National Board of 
Revenue) as indicated in the Proposal Data 
Sheet (PDS), issues this Request for Proposal
(RFP) for the supply of Services as specified in 
the PDS and described in details in Terms of }
Reference (ToR) section 6 of Request for
Proposal) in accordance with the method of
selection specified in the PDS.
<br>
1.2 Only those short-listed Applicants who
are sent the Letter of Invitation and this RFP are
to submit a Proposal for supply of consulting
services required for assignment. The Proposal
will be the basis for contract negotiations and
ultimately for a signed Contract with the select-
ed Applicant.        (emphasis added)"
<br>
Section 15.3 of the RFP provides as follows :
<br>
"15.3 The selection method for awarding
the final contract will follow the guidelines laid
down under the Quality and Cost Based


Selection (QCBS) process in accordance with


the Public Procurement Act, 2006 and the


Public Procurement Rules 2008 of Bangladesh;


however the available budget shall not be dis-


closed.” (Emphasis added)

<br>



Subsequently, in accordance with the Government's


request, the petitioners submitted applications and


participated in the tender process and became suc-


cessful bidders. They were the successful bidders


and entered into "Contract for Employment of Pre-


Shipment Inspection Agency" on 22-9-2008 . Since


hen the petitioners have been carrying out pre-ship-


rent inspection services in accordance with the


ems of Contract.



            

